What are developmental disabilities? Developmental disabilities are conditions that are usually present at birth. They can affect a child's growth and development. These conditions can cause physical, learning, language, or behavior issues. They can include: Learning disabilities . These conditions affect the ability to learn. Autism spectrum disorder (ASD). This is a disorder that affects behavior, communication, and social skills. Cerebral palsy (CP). This is a condition that affects movement, coordination, and balance. Physical disabilities. These could include blindness or deafness . Conditions that can affect both physical and mental abilities. This could include Down syndrome . These conditions can cause lifelong challenges in learning. Completing daily tasks may be difficult. Early treatment may help your child learn important skills and make the most of their strengths. What causes developmental disabilities? Developmental disabilities are often present at birth. They can occur due to various reasons. These can include: Genetic or chromosome abnormalities. These cause conditions such as Down syndrome, Fragile-X-Syndrome , and Rett syndrome . Use of substances while pregnant. For example, drinking alcohol when pregnant can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorders . Certain infections during pregnancy . Preterm birth or low birth weight . How are developmental disabilities diagnosed? The way a developmental disability is diagnosed depends on the condition. Screening tests or a physical exam may be done to check for a medical problem. Other tests and questionnaires may help find out if your child has a developmental disability. These may include: Screening tests that are done during pregnancy or for newborns Developmental and behavioral screening tests or questionnaires  to check if your child is developing on schedule Observing your child's behavior and how they interact with other people Testing your child's intellectual and school performance Asking about your family history What are the treatments for developmental disabilities? If your child has a developmental disability, these are usually lifelong conditions. Often, there is no cure, but treatment can help the symptoms. Treatments can include: Physical, speech, and occupational therapy Special teaching methods Psychological counseling To keep track of how your child grows and changes over time NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development