What is juvenile arthritis? Juvenile arthritis (JA) is arthritis that happens in children. It causes joint inflammation (swelling), pain, stiffness, and loss of motion. Joints are places where two bones meet, such as your elbow or knee. It can affect any joint, but it is more common in the knees, hands, and feet. JA can affect your child's growth and development, and in some cases, it can also affect other organs. Finding JA early and starting treatment can help manage symptoms and reduce joint damage. Who is more likely to get juvenile arthritis? There are several other forms of arthritis affecting children. The most common type of JA in children under age 16 is juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA). There are multiple types of JIA. Symptoms and the number of joints affected help determine the type. Some types of JIA are more common in girls. What causes juvenile arthritis? The exact cause of JA is unknown. Most types are autoimmune disorders . This means that your immune system, which normally helps your body fight infection, attacks your body's tissues. What are the symptoms of juvenile arthritis? Symptoms can vary depending on the type of JA. The symptoms of most types include joint pain, swelling, warmth, and stiffness. Your child may not complain of pain or stiffness, but one early sign of JA may be limping or clumsiness in the morning or after resting. Larger joints, such as the knee, may be swollen. Certain types of JA can cause a high fever , swollen lymph nodes, a rash, growth problems, or eye inflammation in some children. Symptoms can come and go. Some children have just one or two flare-ups. Others have symptoms that never go away. How is juvenile arthritis diagnosed? There is no single test for JA, so it can be hard to diagnose. Your health care provider may: Ask about medical history and symptoms. Do a physical exam. Order blood tests or imaging studies . What are the treatments for juvenile arthritis? A team of providers usually treats JA. Treatment will depend on your child's age, the type of JA, and how bad it is. Treatment can include medicines and physical therapy to help maintain movement and reduce swelling and pain. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases