What is pain? Pain is a signal in your nervous system that something may be wrong. It is an unpleasant feeling, such as a prick, tingle, sting, burn, or ache. Each person feels pain differently, even if the reason for the pain is the same. Pain may be sharp or dull. It may come and go, or it may be constant. You may feel pain in one area of your body, such as your back , abdomen , chest , pelvis , or you may feel pain all over. There are two types of pain: Acute pain usually comes on suddenly, because of a disease, injury, or inflammation (irritation, redness, and/or swelling). It usually goes away when the cause is treated or healed, though sometimes it can turn into chronic pain . Chronic pain lasts for longer than three months or the time in which you should have healed. It can cause severe problems. What are pain relievers? Pain relievers are medicines that reduce or relieve pain. There are many pain medicines, each with advantages and risks. Some are over-the-counter (OTC) medicines. Others are stronger medicines, which are available by prescription. The most powerful prescription pain relievers are opioids. They are very effective, but people who take them are at risk of addiction and overdose . Because of the side effects and risks of pain relievers, you may want to try non-drug treatments first. If you need to take medicines, doing some non-drug treatments may allow you to take a lower dose. What are some non-drug treatments for pain? Many non-drug treatments can help with pain. It is important to check with your health care provider before trying any of them: Acupuncture involves stimulating acupuncture points. These are specific points on your body. There are different acupuncture methods. The most common one involves inserting thin needles through the skin. Others include using pressure, electrical stimulation, and heat. Acupuncture is based on the belief that qi (vital energy) flows through the body along paths, called meridians. Practitioners believe that triggering the acupuncture points can rebalance the qi. Research suggests that acupuncture can help manage certain pain conditions. Biofeedback techniques use electronic devices to measure body functions such as breathing and heart rate. This teaches you to be more aware of your body functions so you can learn to control them. For example, a biofeedback device may show you measurements of your muscle tension. By watching how these measurements change, you can become more aware of when your muscles are tense and learn to relax them. Biofeedback may help to control pain, including chronic headaches and back pain. Electrical stimulation involves using a device to send a gentle electric current to your nerves or muscles. This can help treat pain by changing or blocking pain signals. Types include: Transcutaneous electrical stimulation (TENS) Implanted electric nerve stimulation Deep brain or spinal cord stimulation Massage therapy is a treatment in which the soft tissues of the body are kneaded, rubbed, tapped, and stroked. Among other benefits, it may help people relax, and relieve stress and pain. Meditation is a mind-body practice in which you focus your attention on something, such as an object, word, phrase, or breathing. This helps you to minimize distracting or stressful thoughts or feelings. Physical therapy uses techniques such as heat, cold, exercise, massage, and manipulation. It can help to control pain, condition muscles and restore strength. Psychotherapy (talk therapy) uses methods such as discussion, listening, and counseling to treat mental and behavioral disorders. It can also help people who have pain, especially chronic pain, by: Teaching them coping skills to better deal with the stress that pain can cause Addressing negative thoughts and emotions that can make pain worse Providing them with support Relaxation therapy can help reduce muscle tension and stress, lower blood pressure, and control pain. It may involve tensing and relaxing muscles throughout the body. It may be used with guided imagery (focusing the mind on positive images) and meditation. Surgery can sometimes be necessary to treat severe pain, especially when back problems or serious musculoskeletal injuries cause it. There are always risks to getting surgery, and it does not always work to treat pain. It is important to go through all the risks and benefits with your provider.