What are ovaries? The ovaries are a pair of female reproductive glands that make eggs and female hormones . Women have one ovary on each side of the uterus (where a fetus grows during pregnancy). Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond. Ovaries play a role in menstruation , pregnancy, and menopause .  Your ovaries: Produce and store eggs that are released during ovulation (when an egg leaves the ovary and travels into the fallopian tube). If a sperm fertilizes the egg, you can become pregnant. Make the female hormones estrogen and progesterone. Stop making those hormones and releasing eggs during menopause. Some medical problems can affect the ovaries. These can cause various symptoms, and some ovarian disorders may need prompt treatment. What are the types of ovarian disorders? Some problems that can happen with the ovaries can include: Ovarian cancer is when a cancerous tumor forms in the tissues of an ovary. Ovarian cysts are fluid-filled sacs in or on an ovary. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a set of symptoms related to an imbalance of hormones. Primary ovarian insufficiency is when your ovaries stop working before age 40. Ovarian torsion is a twisting of the ovary. Endometriosis is when tissue like the lining in your uterus grows in other places in your body. It may affect the ovaries, fallopian tubes, and tissue lining the pelvis. Pelvic inflammatory disease is an infection and inflammation of the uterus, ovaries, and other female reproductive organs. Ovarian tumors. What causes ovarian disorders? Ovarian disorders can happen for different reasons depending on the condition. Sometimes the cause is unknown. What are the symptoms of ovarian disorders? Your symptoms may be different, depending on the problem with your ovaries. Some ovarian disorders, such as ovarian cysts, may cause few or even no symptoms. Other disorders may cause more severe symptoms. Symptoms can include: Pelvic pain , which often happens during your period Nausea or diarrhea Vaginal bleeding that is between periods, very heavy, or longer than usual Vaginal discharge Painful menstrual cramps How are ovarian disorders diagnosed? To find out if you have a problem with your ovaries, your health care provider: Will ask about your medical history , including your symptoms Will ask about your family health history Will do a physical exam , including a pelvic exam May order imaging tests , or blood tests What are the treatments for ovarian disorders? Treatment depends on the ovarian disorder, your symptoms, overall health, and plans for pregnancy. Treatment can include medicines, such as pain relievers or hormonal birth control , lifestyle changes to reduce symptoms, or sometimes surgery. Ovarian cancer may require surgery, chemotherapy , or other targeted therapy.