What is pain? Pain is a signal in your nervous system that something may be wrong. It is an unpleasant feeling, such as a prick, tingle, sting, burn, or ache. Each person feels pain differently, even if the reason for the pain is the same.  Pain may be sharp or dull. It may be mild or severe. Pain may come and go, or it may be constant. You may feel pain in one area of your body, such as your back , abdomen , chest , or pelvis , or you may feel it all over. Pain can help alert you that there is a problem. If you never felt pain, you might seriously hurt yourself without knowing it, or you might not realize you have a medical problem that needs treatment. Finding out what's causing your pain will help your health care provider determine the best way to manage or treat it. What are the types of pain? Patterns and types of pain are named based on how long and how often you have pain. These include: Acute pain usually happens suddenly because of a disease, injury, or inflammation (irritation, redness, and/or swelling). This type of pain is often sharp and acts as a warning that something is wrong. It usually goes away when the cause is treated or healed, though sometimes it can turn into chronic pain . Some examples of causes of acute pain include broken bones or dental issues . Chronic pain lasts for longer than three months or the time in which you should have healed.  It can affect all aspects of daily life, including your mood and relationships. Some conditions that might cause chronic pain include arthritis or back problems. Episodic pain can happen from time to time and may occur with long-term medical conditions. Some conditions that might cause episodic pain include sickle cell disease or chronic migraines . Pain may also be categorized by what is likely to be the cause of the pain. Pain may be described as nociceptive (caused by tissue damage or inflammation), neuropathic (caused by nerve damage), or nociplastic (caused by changes in how your nervous system processes pain). What causes pain? Understanding what causes pain and why people feel it differently may be difficult. Often, it's easier to find the cause of acute pain due to an injury than the cause of chronic pain, or you may have an ongoing cause of pain, such as cancer . In some cases, there is no clear cause. Environmental factors and psychological factors such as stress and beliefs about pain may affect the way you feel pain and respond to treatment. How is pain diagnosed? You are the only one who knows how your pain feels. Your provider can best measure your pain by how you report it. They may ask you: Where is the pain in your body? How long have you had the pain? How does the pain feel, such as stinging, burning, or sharp? How often do you have pain? When do you feel pain, such as in the morning, evening, or all the time? What relieves the pain? How does pain affect your daily life? Is the pain mild, moderate, or severe? To rate the pain on a scale. If the cause of your pain is unknown, your provider may also do a physical exam and order blood tests or other medical tests to help find the cause. What are the treatments for pain? Pain is not always curable, but there are many ways to manage and treat it. Treatment depends on the cause and type of pain. Treatments may include medicines, such as pain relievers . There are also non-drug treatments , such as acupuncture , physical therapy, and sometimes surgery. Depending on the cause of your pain and your symptoms, your provider may recommend lifestyle changes. These may include suggestions for: Eating a healthy diet Adding exercise Losing weight Managing stress Improving mental health NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke